W-12362714-type selector draft (#224)
mulesoft/docs-dataweave: modules/ROOT/pages/dataweave-type-selector.adoc

> = Type Selector

Reviewer: This title is using the terminology we were talking about `== Type Selector`

Reviewer: Maybe it could be `= Selecting Fields in DataWeave Types` or something.

Reviewer: I'm good with `== Selecting Types` here as discussed on the Slack channel.

ifndef::env-site,env-github[]
include::_attributes.adoc[]
endif::[]

Using the dot selector (`.`) over DataWeave xref:dataweave-type-system.adoc#composite-types[types] enables you to declare new types from existing ones. Combined with the xref:dataweave-selectors-reusing-types.adoc[module loader], DataWeave can also load and translate declarations from a custom module file into DataWeave type directives that can be accessed in the same way as types from any other DataWeave module.

> == Example: Declaring a New Type from an Existing Type

Reviewer: Suggest that each example follow the same pattern.

So if we use `== Example: Doing Something` for one heading, we would do that for others. Alternatively, we could eliminate the "Example: " part. Similarly though, if we use something like "== Doing Something" in one place it should be like that everywhere, so for ex, should "Composition," "Union Types," "Generics" also following a similar pattern?

The following example declares the `NameType` from the `User` type. Using the dot selector in `User.name` to declare the `name` variable a `NameType` enables the `typeOf()`  function to return the basic type, `"String"`. Notice how the DataWeave variable `name` is declared as a `NameType` value "Seba".

.DataWeave script:
[source,dataweave,linenums]
----
%dw 2.0
type User = {name: String}
type NameType = User.name
var name: NameType = "Seba"
---
typeOf(name)
----

.Output: 
----
"String"
----

> == Use the Dot Selector (`.`) Over DataWeave Types

Reviewer: ```suggestion
== Use the Dot Selector (`.`) Over DataWeave Types
```
Not sure that this heading is needed here. The H3 subsections could become H2 headings that follow the same heading pattern (e.g., "Doing X"). Suggestions below.

Reviewer: If the subsections here are H2 level headings, they will appear as links on the right side of the page, which could enhance the usability of this page. Otherwise people will have to scroll down the page to see that we can do selection with namespaces, etc. I'm thinking that people can scan and see what's on the page with less scrolling. (which could be another argument for breaking up that selector page into separate pages)

> === Composition

Reviewer: ```suggestion
== Composing a Type from an Existing Type's Field
```

or some such

The following example uses the dot selector (`.`) to declare a new type `Address` from one key in the complex type `User`.

.DataWeave script:
[source,dataweave,linenums]
----
%dw 2.0
output application/json
type User = {
 address : {country: String, city: String, street: String, number: Number},
 userName : String
}
type Address = User.address

var userAddress: Address = {country: "Argentina", city: "Rosario", street: "Calle Falsa", number: 123}
---
userAddress
----

.Output:
[source,json,linenums]
----
{
 "country": "Argentina",
 "city": "Rosario",
 "street": "Calle Falsa",
 "number": 123
}
----

> === Union Types

Reviewer: ```suggestion
== Selecting Types from Union Types
```

or some such

> The next example shows how type selection can also be used with `Union` types that consist of `Object` types:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following example shows how type selection can also be used with `Union` types that consist of `Object` types:
```

.DataWeave script:
[source,dataweave,linenums]
----
%dw 2.0
output application/json
type ID = {name: String} | {id: Number}
var name: ID = {name: "Seba"}
var id: ID = {id: 38123}
var nameString: ID.name = "Seba"
var idNumber: ID.id = 38123
---
[name, id, nameString ++ " is of type " ++ typeOf(nameString), idNumber ++ " is of type " ++ typeOf(idNumber)]
----

.Output:
[source,json,linenums]
----
[
  {
    "name": "Seba"
  },
  {
    "id": 38123
  },
  "Seba is of type String",
  "38123 is of type Number"
]
----

However, the following script fails because the second type is not an `Object` type and there is no way to reference it with the selector:

.DataWeave script:
[source,dataweave,linenums]
----
%dw 2.0
output application/json
type UnionType = {name: String} | Number
type Fail = UnionType.name
---
{}
----

.Output:
[source,json,linenums]
----
Cannot do selection on Type: Number

4| type Fail = UnionType.name
----

> === Namespace

Reviewer: ```suggestion
== Selecting Namespaces from a Type
```

}
var nameString: User.ns1#name = "Seba"
var nameNumber: User.name = 123
---
{
   "NameString" : typeOf(nameString),
   "NameNumber" : typeOf(nameNumber)
}
----

.Output:
[source,json,linenums]
----
{
 "NameString": "String",
 "NameNumber": "Number"
}
----

=== Metadata
This example outlines how type selection preserves metadata associated with the type:

.DataWeave script:
[source,dataweave,linenums]
----
%dw 2.0
output application/json
type User = {
 birthDate: Date {format: "dd-MMM-yy"},
 userName : String {schema: "value"}
}
type FormattedDate = User.birthDate
type UserName = User.userName
var formattedDate: FormattedDate = "10-SEP-15" as Date {format: "dd-MMM-yy"}
var otherFormatDate = "23-10-2022" as Date {format: "dd-MM-yyyy"}
var userName = "Messi" as String {schema: "value"}
var otherUserName = "Di María" as String {schema: "otherValue"}
---
{
formattedDate: formattedDate is FormattedDate,
userName: userName is UserName,
otherFormatDate: otherFormatDate is FormattedDate,
otherUserName: otherUserName is UserName
}
----

.Output:
[source,json,linenums]
----
{
 "formattedDate": true,
 "userName": true,
 "otherFormatDate": false,
 "otherUserName": false
}
----

> === Generics

Reviewer: we're calling these "type parameters" 
See "Specify Type Parameters" here: https://github.com/mulesoft/docs-dataweave/blob/19460483e6162827f56e86e95ea284ba4825a182/modules/ROOT/pages/dataweave-functions-lambdas.adoc

Reviewer: Same thing to modify the section using the H2 pattern. 

== Generics

== Selecting Types with Type Parameters (Generics)

or something like that maybe?

> This example shows type selection with generics:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This example shows type selection with type parameters:
```

Might need to explain these are similar to generics

.DataWeave script:
[source,dataweave,linenums]
----
%dw 2.0
output application/json
type WithParameters<A, B> = {first: A, second: B, nestedObject: {message: A}}
---
{
 a: true is WithParameters<Boolean, Number>.first,
 b: 4592 is WithParameters<String, Number>.second,
 c: "sdf" is WithParameters<String, Number>.nestedObject.message,
}
----

.Output:
[source,json,linenums]

> ----

Reviewer: Ok, the output needs to be fixed. I see this in the playground:

```
{
  "a": true,
  "b": true,
  "c": true
}
```
Looks like the fix above to the script was added as the output.

> = Type Selector

Reviewer: do we think of this as a type selector or a single-value selector that you can use for other data structures?

ifndef::env-site,env-github[]
include::_attributes.adoc[]
endif::[]

> The type selector allows the use of the `.` selector over xref:dataweave-type-system.adoc#composite-types[types] which enables you to easily declare types from existing ones. This feature can also be combined with the new xref:dataweave-selectors-reusing-types.adoc[module loader feature] to load files and translate declarations inside your file into DataWeave type directives which can be accessed in the same way as types from any other module:

Reviewer: I think the selector is the `.`.

> The type selector allows the use of the `.` selector over xref:dataweave-type-system.adoc#composite-types[types] which enables you to easily declare types from existing ones. This feature can also be combined with the new xref:dataweave-selectors-reusing-types.adoc[module loader feature] to load files and translate declarations inside your file into DataWeave type directives which can be accessed in the same way as types from any other module:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Using the type selector (`.`) over xref:dataweave-type-system.adoc#composite-types[types] enables you to declare new types from existing ones. Combined with the DataWeave xref:dataweave-selectors-reusing-types.adoc[module loader], you can also load files and translate declarations inside your file into DataWeave type directives that can be accessed in the same way as types from any other module::
```

Reviewer: Suggest avoiding use of terms like "the new" since it won't be new in the next version and "easily" since it's kind of subjective.

Reviewer: see if the dev is ok with this formulation

Reviewer: I'm concerned about our terminology for this selector also. We should all discuss. We use the dot selector for several similar purposes. Sorry to ramble across several comments... let's discuss with the dev.

> 

Reviewer: == Example: Declaring a New Type from an Existing Type

The following example declares the `NameType` from the `User` type. Using the dot selector in `User.name` to declare the `name` variable a `NameType` enables the `typeOf()`  function to return the basic type, `"String"`. Notice how the DataWeave variable `name` is declared as a `NameType` value "Seba".

Reviewer: Why does `typeOf()` return "String" and not "NameType"?

Author: Dev's input:
It has to do with how the typeOf() function works. It always returns the real primitive type (which is String). What I wanted to illustrate was how the String type was properly propagated from the NameType type. If you think this is confusing, we can shorten it to:
"
%dw 2.0
type User = {name: String}
type NameType = User.name
var name: NameType = "Seba"
"
and cut it there (no output), just to show how the selection works.

Example: DataWeave script
[source,dataweave,linenums]
----
%dw 2.0

> ---

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```

Reviewer: there's an extra `---` in the script.

type User = {name: String}
type NameType = User.name
var name: NameType = "Seba"
---
typeOf(name)
----

Output 
----
"String"
----

> == Examples on How to Use Type Selector

Reviewer: The previous example above this heading is also using the type selector. Maybe each example needs its own heading.

> The following example describes how type selection is useful for declaring complex types from other types already declared:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following example uses the dot selector to declare a new type `Address` from one key in the complex type `User`.
```

Reviewer: Suggesting this change bc I think we're declaring the new (less complex) type from the complex type rather than the other way around, and we're showing how you can use the dot/type selector do that. 

Please confirm with dev. Thx

Author: Dev's ok with it.

> Example: Composition

Reviewer: These subsections probably need to be asciidoc headings so they can be differentiated from regular text.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
== Example: Composition
```
or whatever heading level makes sense here

Reviewer: and similar formatting for each example

> DataWeave script

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.DataWeave script:

```
That will turn this into a a heading of sorts to distinguish it from other text, such as you see here: https://docs.mulesoft.com/dataweave/2.2/dataweave-cookbook-extract-data#single_value

Or alternatively, you could turn them into H3 headings, such as 
`=== DataWeave Script` under each example or whatever. 

let's discuss formatting options

[source,dataweave,linenums]
----
%dw 2.0
output application/json

> ---

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

type User = {
 address : {country: String, city: String, street: String, number: Number},
 userName : String
}
type Address = User.address

var userAddress: Address = {country: "Argentina", city: "Rosario", street: "Calle Falsa", number: 123}
---
userAddress
----

> Output

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.Output

```

Reviewer: essentially same as comment for "DataWeave script"

[source,json,linenums]
----
{
 "country": "Argentina",
 "city": "Rosario",
 "street": "Calle Falsa",
 "number": 123
}
----

> The next example shows how type selection can also be used with Union Types involving object types:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The next example shows how type selection can also be used with Union Types involving object types:
```

> The next example shows how type selection can also be used with Union Types involving object types:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The next example shows how type selection can also be used with `Union` types that consist of `Object` types:
```

> Example: Union Types

Reviewer: another subsection, etc.

> DataWeave script

Reviewer: similar formatting everywhere for "DataWeave script" and "Output"

[source,dataweave,linenums]
----
%dw 2.0
output application/json

> ---

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

type ID = {name: String} | {id: Number}
var name: ID = {name: "Seba"}
var id: ID = {id: 38123}
var nameString: ID.name = "Seba"
var idNumber: ID.id = 38123
---
[name, id, nameString ++ " is of type " ++ typeOf(nameString), idNumber ++ " is of type " ++ typeOf(idNumber)]
----

Output
[source,json,linenums]
----
[
  {
    "name": "Seba"
  },
  {
    "id": 38123
  },
  "Seba is of type String",
  "38123 is of type Number"
]
----

> However, the following script fails because the second type is not an object type and there is no way to reference it with the selector:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, the following script fails because the second type is not an `Object` type and there is no way to reference it with the selector:
```

DataWeave script
[source,dataweave,linenums]
----
%dw 2.0
output application/json

> ---

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

type UnionType = {name: String} | Number
type Fail = UnionType.name
---
{}
----

Output
[source,json,linenums]
----
Cannot do selection on Type: Number

4| type Fail = UnionType.name
----

> In the following example, Type selection also supports namespaces:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the following example, type selection also supports namespaces:
```

Example: Namespace

DataWeave script
[source,dataweave,linenums]
----
%dw 2.0
output application/json
---
ns ns1 http://acme.com
type User = {
 ns1#name : String,
 name : Number,
}
var nameString: User.ns1#name = "Seba"
var nameNumber: User.name = 123
---
{
   "NameString" : typeOf(nameString),
   "NameNumber" : typeOf(nameNumber)
}
----

Output
[source,json,linenums]
----
{
 "NameString": "String",
 "NameNumber": "Number"
}
----

This example outlines how Type selection preserves metadata associated with the type:

Example: Metadata

DataWeave script
[source,dataweave,linenums]
----
%dw 2.0
output application/json

> ---

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```
Extra `---` removed. That differentiates the scripts header content (above the dashes) from the body (below). The type definition goes in the header.

Reviewer: You can test the script in the playground to see when there's an issue: https://dataweave.mulesoft.com/learn/playground

type User = {
 birthDate: Date {format: "dd-MMM-yy"},
 userName : String {schema: "value"}
}
type FormattedDate = User.birthDate
type UserName = User.userName
var formattedDate: FormattedDate = "10-SEP-15" as Date {format: "dd-MMM-yy"}
var otherFormatDate = "23-10-2022" as Date {format: "dd-MM-yyyy"}
var userName = "Messi" as String {schema: "value"}
var otherUserName = "Di María" as String {schema: "otherValue"}
---
{
formattedDate: formattedDate is FormattedDate,
userName: userName is UserName,
otherFormatDate: otherFormatDate is FormattedDate,
otherUserName: otherUserName is UserName
}
----

Output
[source,json,linenums]
----
{
 "formattedDate": true,
 "userName": true,
 "otherFormatDate": false,
 "otherUserName": false
}
----

> This example shows how Type selection also works with generics:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This example shows type selection with generics:
```

Reviewer: Do we call these "generics" in DW? I thought there was another name we use. Can't recall right now.

Author: Are you referring to Lambda Expressions [https://docs.mulesoft.com/dataweave/2.4/dataweave-language-guide#lambda-expressions]?

Example: Generics

DataWeave script
[source,dataweave,linenums]

> ----

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

%dw 2.0
output application/json

> ---

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

type WithParameters<A, B> = {first: A, second: B, nestedObject: {message: A}}

> ----

Reviewer: is the body missing from this script? It doesn't return/output anything.

Author: The dev fixed the doc. I'll add the missing part.
